docs: rtl date time format blog (#7936)
adobe/react-spectrum: packages/dev/docs/pages/blog/rtl-date-time.mdx

<Video src={localeVideoURL} loop autoPlay muted />

## Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm

To format the segments according to the user locale, we rely on the browser’s [Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/). However, we found that some of our CSS styles were interferring with algorithm's application, leading to incorrect formating. For instance, in `he-IL`, the proper numeric date format should be `DD.MM.YYYY`, but our date component was displaying `YYYY.MM.DD`. This issue varied across different RTL languages for date fields, but for time fields, we observed a consistent problem across all RTL languages where time segments were flipped, rendering `MM:HH` instead of the correct `HH:MM` format.

> <RTLTimefield />

Author: i have some things i'd like to fix this image so it'll get eventually get replaced but the jist is there. wanted to have something so people could see how the blog flows with this image

We found the culprit to be two things. First, we were applying `display: flex` on the container wrapping the segments. Second, each segment were being rendered as divs with `display: block`. Instead, we needed to use [normal CSS flow layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_display/Flow_layout) on the wrapper around the segments and update each segment to be a span instead. 

While it seemed like a relatively simple fix, we later discovered through testing that this only corrected the format when segments contained actual values. If they had placeholder values, the order was still incorrect, causing some undesirable behaviors. It seemed that the Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm was interpreting placeholder values differently from actual values. As a result, when a segment was cleared back to its placeholder, it would shift back to the incorrect order. And then when a user entered a value, the segment would shift back to its correct order. Our challenge was to ensure consistent formatting regardless of whether a segment contained a placeholder or user-entered value — all without hard coding segment order for each locale. 

> <Video src={placeholderVideoURL} loop autoPlay muted />

Author: ah yeah i can see how that's confusing. i wanted the video to showcase how it's confusing for the segments to shift around but maybe i can also insert images as well that are annotated to explain. i'll play around with it a bit

Instead of wrapping the the segments in a `<bdo>` tag with a dir=“ltr” which would impact the DOM structure and have potentially introduce side effects, we chose to use the [LRI (left-to-right isolate) Unicode character](https://www.w3.org/International/questions/qa-bidi-unicode-controls) to encapsulate the time segments and force an LTR direction. Adding this Unicode character was the equivalent of wrapping the time segments in a `<bdo>` tag but offered several advantages. Since the character is invisible, there were no visual changes, and by adding it as a siblings to the segments, we avoided major structural changes to the DOM. Additionally, by enforcing an LTR direction, we no longer had to worry about whether the time field consisted of placeholder or actual values. Lastly, it ensured that when a date field included a time, that the time field appeared in the correct order with respect to the date field (e.g. 8:45 1/31/2025 instead of 1/31/2025 8:45)

> Below is a simplified code example of how we utilitze using Unicode characters to enforce an left-to-right direction on the segments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a simplified code example of how we utilize Unicode characters to enforce an left-to-right direction on the segments:
```

```tsx example render=false
<div styles={{display: 'inline'}}>
  <span>{'\u2066'}</span>
  <span aria-label="hour">2</span>
  <span>:</span>
  <span aria-label="minute">45</span>
  <span>{'\u2069'}</span>
</div>

> ```

Reviewer: is it possible to highlight the `{'\u2066'}` and `{'\u2069'}`?

## DateFields

> Date fields, on the other hand, were much more complicated to solve in comparsion. Since the Unicode Bidirectional algorithm was not formatting the segments, the resulting format appeared to mirror the order in which the segments were stored, as returned by [DateFormatter](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/internationalized/date/DateFormatter.html#dateformatter). This suggested that we could apply a similar approach to what we used for time fields — forcing a left-to-right direction on the date segments. However, this assumption proved too broad. In some locales, such as `ar-AE`, the date segments were already correctly formatted, meaning that enforcing a left-to-right direction would make it incorrect. We found that in Arabic, the separators between date segments contained [right-to-left marks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_directional_marks) which was the reasoning behind why the date segments were already correctly formatted. In contrast, Hebrew did not have such markers. Therefore, we had to adopt a different approach that accounted for these variations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Date fields, on the other hand, were much more complicated to solve in comparison. Since the Unicode Bidirectional algorithm was not formatting the segments, the resulting format appeared to mirror the order in which the segments were stored, as returned by [DateFormatter](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/internationalized/date/DateFormatter.html#dateformatter). This suggested that we could apply a similar approach to what we used for time fields — forcing a left-to-right direction on the date segments. However, this assumption proved too broad. In some locales, such as Arabic (`ar-AE`), the date segments were already correctly formatted, meaning that enforcing a left-to-right direction would be erroneous. We found that in Arabic, the separators between date segments contained [right-to-left marks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_directional_marks) which was the reasoning behind why the date segments were already correctly formatted. In contrast, Hebrew did not have such markers. Therefore, we had to adopt a different approach that accounted for these variations. 
```

dunno why the diff isn't showing up but just some more stylistic changes: `ar-AE` to `Arabic (ar-AE)` and using "erroneous"

```tsx example render=false
// An example of a date field in ar-AE
<div>
  <span aria-label="day">3</span>
  <span>&rlm;/</span>
  <span aria-label="month">11</span>
  <span>&rlm;/</span>  
  <span aria-label="year">2020</span>
</div>
```

```tsx example render=false
// An example of a date field in he-IL
<div>
  <span aria-label="day">3</span>
  <span>.</span>
  <span aria-label="month">11</span>
  <span>.</span>  
  <span aria-label="year">2020</span>
</div>

> ```

Reviewer: Would be good to highlight the `<span>&rlm;/</span>` if possible

> Through much trial and error, we discovered that appplying the [left-to-right embedding (LRE) Unicode](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Explicit_Directional_Embeddings) on the date segments allowed us to to treat the text as embedded left-to-right while preserving the right-to-left mark on the separators, ensuring that Arabic dates display in the correct format. While we could have added Unicode to the segments like we did with the time fields, we opted for the [equivalent CSS](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Markup_And_Formatting) approach instead to avoid modifying the DOM. This CSS was applied on date segments with placeholder or actual values to avoid the behavior discussed earlier with shifting segments. Through additional testing, we found that we should only apply left-to-right embedding on numeric values. If the value was displayed as text, say "November" instead of "11", we did not apply this CSS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through much trial and error, we discovered that appplying the [left-to-right embedding (LRE) Unicode](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Explicit_Directional_Embeddings) on the date segments allowed us to to treat the text as embedded left-to-right while preserving the right-to-left mark on the separators, ensuring that Arabic dates display in the correct format. While we could have added Unicode to the segments like we did with the time fields, we opted for the [equivalent CSS](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Markup_And_Formatting) approach instead to avoid modifying the DOM. This CSS is applied on date segments with placeholder or actual values to avoid the behavior discussed earlier with shifting segments. Through additional testing, we found that we should only apply left-to-right embedding on numeric values. If the value was displayed as text (e.g. "November" instead of "11") we did not apply this CSS. 
```
consistency with other section using e.g.

## Keyboard Navigation

> After fixing the formatting though, we also needed to update the keyboard navigation. Previously, if pressing the left arrow key, you would go to the next node in the DOM and vice versa for the right arrow key. After these changes though, visually adjacent elements were not necessarily adjacent in the DOM so this would not work anymore. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After fixing the formatting, we also needed to update the keyboard navigation. Previously, when pressing the left arrow key, you would go to the next node in the DOM and vice versa for the right arrow key. After these changes though, visually adjacent elements were not necessarily adjacent in the DOM so this would not work anymore. 
```

> Below is an example of a date field in Hebrew with the correct date format but incorrect keyboard navigation. Pressing the left arrow key should navigate you to the segment to the immediate left, while the right arrow key should navigate you to the segment to your immediate right. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a date field in Hebrew with the correct date format but incorrect keyboard navigation. Pressing the left arrow key should navigate you to the segment to the immediate left, while the right arrow key should navigate you to the segment to the immediate right. 
```

<Video src={keyboardVideoURL} loop autoPlay muted />

> As a result, we updated the keyboard navigation in right-to-left langauges to rely on the positioning of the different segments to determine which node to receive focus for an intuitive keyboard experience.

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure what this fix entails, mind clarifying?

## Conclusion

> If you’ve made it this far, you probably understand just how challenging it is to format dates correctly, especially in right-to-left languages. Fortunately, tools like the Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm help with formatting so we don’t have to handle everything manually. However, as we discovered with this bug, it doesn’t always work as expected and unexpected factors can interfere with it.

Reviewer: Maybe something like "As you can see, formatting dates correctly is quite challenging, especially in right-to-left languages." for a more confident spin on it?

> After extensive testing, we developed a solution that ensures proper formatting for users of React Spectrum, React Aria Components, and our hooks. If you haven’t tried our date and time components yet, we encourage you to check them out! And if you’re already using them, be sure to update to the latest version (v3.40) to ensure correct formatting in right-to-left languages and to make the appropriate changes noted in the [release notes](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/releases/2025-03-05.html#date-and-time-formatting-in-rtl-languages)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After extensive testing, we developed a solution that ensures proper formatting for users of React Spectrum, React Aria Components, and our hooks. If you haven’t tried our date and time components yet, we encourage you to check them out! And if you’re already using them, be sure to update to the latest version (v^3.40) to ensure correct formatting in right-to-left languages and to make the appropriate changes noted in the [release notes](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/releases/2025-03-05.html#date-and-time-formatting-in-rtl-languages)!
```

Reviewer 2: or, "at least version"

While it seemed like a relatively simple fix, we later discovered through testing that this only corrected the format when segments contained numeric values. If they had placeholder values, the order was still incorrect, causing some undesirable behaviors. This was because the placeholders are typically non-numeric characters, e.g. `'شهر'` representing "month" in Arabic. As a result, when the user pressed the Backspace key to clear a segment to its placeholder, the order of the segments would change. Then, when a user entered a numeric value, the segment would shift back to its correct order. This posed an interesting challenge: how do we ensure consistent formatting regardless of whether a segment contained a placeholder or a user-entered value — all without hard coding segment order for each locale?

Below is an example of how the dates were being formatted based on user-entered or placeholder values along with a video to demonstrate the shifting behavior:

<RTLActualPlaceholder />

<Video alt="Demo of the date segments shifting when backspacing" src={placeholderVideoURL} muted controls />

## TimeFields

> We first addressed time fields since they were easier to fix. As mentioned earlier, the segments in time fields for RTL languages were flipped. We learned that regardless of locale, all time fields should follow the `HH:MM` format. Knowing this, we could apply a direction of left-to-right (LTR) on the numeric values across all segments in a time field. We could do this by wrapping the time field in a `<bdo>` tag and setting the `dir` attribute to `ltr` which would override the current text direction from `rtl` to `ltr`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We first addressed time fields since they were easier to fix. As mentioned earlier, the segments in time fields for RTL languages were flipped. We learned that regardless of locale, all time fields should follow the `HH:MM` format. Knowing this, we could apply a direction of left-to-right (LTR) on the numeric values across all segments in a time field. We could do this by wrapping the time field in a [`<bdo>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/bdo) tag and setting the `dir` attribute to `ltr` which would override the current text direction from `rtl` to `ltr`. 
```

> However, instead of changing the DOM structure and introducing potential side effects, we chose to use the [LRI (left-to-right isolate) Unicode character](https://www.w3.org/International/questions/qa-bidi-unicode-controls) to encapsulate the time segments and force an LTR direction. This sets the text direction to `ltr` and isolates the time field from the surrounding text. Adding this Unicode character is the equivalent of wrapping the time segments in a `<bdo>` tag but offers several advantages. Since the character is invisible, there are no visual changes, and by adding it as a sibling to the segments, we avoided major structural changes to the DOM. Additionally, by enforcing a LTR direction, we no longer had to worry about whether the time field consisted of placeholders or numeric values. Lastly, it ensured that when a date field included a time, that the time field appeared in the correct order with respect to the date field (e.g. `8:45 1/31/2025` instead of `1/31/2025 8:45`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, instead of changing the DOM structure and introducing potential side effects, we chose to use the [LRI (left-to-right isolate) Unicode character](https://www.w3.org/International/questions/qa-bidi-unicode-controls) to encapsulate the time segments and force an LTR direction. This sets the text direction to `ltr` and isolates the time field from the surrounding text. Adding this Unicode character is the equivalent of wrapping the time segments in a `<bdo>` tag but offers several advantages. Since the character is invisible, there are no visual changes, and by adding it as a sibling to the segments, we avoided major structural changes to the DOM. Additionally, by enforcing an LTR direction, we no longer had to worry about whether the time field consisted of placeholders or numeric values. Lastly, it ensured that when a date field included a time, that the time field appeared in the correct order with respect to the date field (e.g. `8:45 1/31/2025` instead of `1/31/2025 8:45`).
```

> Below is a simplified code example of how we utilize Unicode characters to enforce an left-to-right direction on the segments:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Below is a simplified code example of how we utilize Unicode characters to enforce a left-to-right direction on the segments:
```

```tsx example render=false
<div styles={{display: 'inline'}}>
  {/*- begin highlight -*/}
  <span>{'\u2066'}</span>
  {/*- end highlight -*/}
  <span aria-label="hour">2</span>
  <span>:</span>
  <span aria-label="minute">45</span>
  {/*- begin highlight -*/}
  <span>{'\u2069'}</span>
  {/*- end highlight -*/}
</div>
```

## DateFields

Date fields, on the other hand, were much more complicated to solve in comparsion. Since we were relying on `display: flex` to format the date segments, the resulting format appeared to mirror the order in which the segments were stored, as returned by [DateFormatter](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/internationalized/date/DateFormatter.html#dateformatter). This suggested that we could apply a similar approach to what we used for time fields — forcing a left-to-right direction on the date segments. 

> However, this assumption proved too broad. In some locales, such as Arabic (`ar-AE`), the date segments were already correctly formatted. In particular, we found that in Arabic, the separators between date segments contained [right-to-left marks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_directional_marks) which were returned by the `Intl.DateTimeFormat` API. This causes the separators to be positioned to the left of the preceding text. When we tried enforcing a left-to-right direction like we did in time field using the same solution, the date field was formatted as `2 2022/ 12/` instead of `2022/12/2` due to the presence of the the right-to-left marks interferring with the LRI Unicode. In contrast, Hebrew did not have such markers. Therefore, we had to adopt a different approach that accounted for these variations. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, this assumption proved too broad. In some locales, such as Arabic (`ar-AE`), the date segments were already correctly formatted. In particular, we found that in Arabic, the separators between date segments contained [right-to-left marks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_directional_marks) which were returned by the `Intl.DateTimeFormat` API. This causes the separators to be positioned to the left of the preceding text. When we tried enforcing a left-to-right direction like we did in time field using the same solution, the date field was formatted as `2 2022/ 12/` instead of `2022/12/2` due to the presence of the right-to-left marks interfering with the LRI Unicode. In contrast, Hebrew did not have such markers. Therefore, we had to adopt a different approach that accounted for these variations. 
```

```tsx example render=false
// An example of a date field in ar-AE
<div>
  <span aria-label="day">3</span>
  {/*- begin highlight -*/}
  <span>&rlm;/</span>
  {/*- end highlight -*/}
  <span aria-label="month">11</span>
  {/*- begin highlight -*/}
  <span>&rlm;/</span>  
  {/*- end highlight -*/}
  <span aria-label="year">2020</span>
</div>
```

```tsx example render=false
// An example of a date field in he-IL
<div>
  <span aria-label="day">3</span>
  {/*- begin highlight -*/}
  <span>.</span>
  {/*- end highlight -*/}
  <span aria-label="month">11</span>
  {/*- begin highlight -*/}
  <span>.</span>
  {/*- end highlight -*/}
  <span aria-label="year">2020</span>
</div>
```

> Through much trial and error, we discovered that appplying the [left-to-right embedding (LRE) Unicode](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Explicit_Directional_Embeddings) on each date segment displayed date fields in Hebrew as left-to-right but also preserved the right-to-left marks on the separaters in Arabic, ensuring that dates in both languages were formatted correctly. While we could have added Unicode to the segments like we did with the time fields, we opted for the [equivalent CSS](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Markup_And_Formatting) approach instead to avoid modifying the DOM. This CSS is applied on date segments with placeholder or actual values to avoid the behavior discussed earlier with shifting segments. Through additional testing, we found that we should only apply left-to-right embedding on numeric values. If the value was displayed as text (e.g. "November" instead of "11") we did not apply this CSS.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Through much trial and error, we discovered that appplying the [left-to-right embedding (LRE) Unicode](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Explicit_Directional_Embeddings) on each date segment displayed date fields in Hebrew as left-to-right but also preserved the right-to-left marks on the separaters in Arabic, ensuring that dates in both languages were formatted correctly. While we could have added Unicode to the segments like we did with the time fields, we opted for the [equivalent CSS](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/#Markup_And_Formatting) approach instead to avoid modifying the DOM. This CSS is applied on date segments with placeholder or actual values to avoid the behavior discussed earlier with shifting segments. Through additional testing, we found that we should only apply left-to-right embedding on numeric values. If the value was displayed as text (e.g. "November" instead of "11"), we did not apply this CSS.
```

  <span aria-label="year">2020</span>
  <span>,</span>
  <span aria-label="hour">8</span>
  <span>:</span>  
  <span aria-label="minute">45</span>
</div>
```

Below is an example of a date field in Hebrew with the correct date format but incorrect keyboard navigation. Pressing the left arrow key should navigate you to the segment to the immediate left, while the right arrow key should navigate you to the segment to the immediate right. 

<Video alt="Demo of keyboard navigation prior to fixes" src={keyboardVideoURL} muted controls />

As a result, we updated the keyboard navigation in right-to-left langauges to calculate the distance between the currently focused segment and other segments to identify the closest node based on whether the left or right arrow key was pressed, rather than reying on the DOM order.

## Conclusion

As you can see, formatting dates correctly is quite challenging, especially in right-to-left languages. Fortunately, tools like the Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm help with formatting so we don’t have to handle everything manually. However, as we discovered with this bug, it doesn’t always work as expected and unexpected factors can interfere with it.

> After extensive testing, we developed a solution that ensures proper formatting for users of React Spectrum, React Aria Components, and our hooks. If you haven’t tried our date and time components yet, we encourage you to check them out! And if you’re already using them, be sure to update to at least the March 2025 release to ensure correct formatting in right-to-left languages and to make the appropriate changes noted in the [release notes](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/releases/2025-03-05.html#date-and-time-formatting-in-rtl-languages)!

Reviewer 4: Link to the docs in here? or add them at the end somewhere?
